The R number, or reproduction number, is the average number of secondary infections produced by a single infected person. If R is 2 then, on average, each infected person infects 2 more people. If R is 0.5 then, on average, for each 2 infected people there will be only 1 new infection. The R number indicates the direction of change, with a value greater than 1 meaning the epidemic is growing and a value less than 1 meaning the epidemic is shrinking. However, the R number alone does not indicate how quickly an epidemic is changing because it does not take into account the time taken for each transmission to take place.

The infection growth rate is an approximation of the percentage change in the number of infections each day and indicates how quickly the number of infections is changing. If the infection growth rate is greater than 0 (+ positive), then the number of new infections per day is increasing. If the infection growth rate is less than 0 (- negative) then the number of new infections per day is decreasing. The size of the infection growth rate indicates the speed of this change.

The R number and infection growth rate are available as estimated ranges for the UK, the four nations and NHS England Regions and represent the transmission of COVID-19 over the past few weeks due to the time delay between someone being infected, having symptoms and needing healthcare.  As they are averages over very different epidemiological situations they should be regarded as a guide to the general trend rather than a description of the epidemic state. 

UK estimates of the R value and growth rate were not produced after 26 March 2021. Given the increasingly localised approach to managing the epidemic, particularly between nations, UK-level estimates are less meaningful than previously and may not accurately reflect the current picture of the epidemic. The R value and growth rates for the 4 nations and NHS England regions are more robust and useful metrics than those for the whole UK. 

When the numbers of cases or deaths fall to low levels and/or there is a high degree of variability in transmission across a region, then care should be taken when interpreting estimates of R and the infection growth rate. For example, a significant amount of variability across a region due to a local outbreak may mean that a single average value does not accurately reflect the way infections are changing throughout that region.

A full definition of the R number and growth rate can be found on [GOV.UK](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/the-r-number-in-the-uk)